---
title: Search Trees
description:
course: Algorithms & Data Structures
tags: []
published: 2022-04-22
lastEdited: 2022-02-05
---

In Week 6 of the course we have dealt with the algorithmic problem of
**searching**. Over some collection of items (data), we would like to be able to
retrieve data elements according to some search key as fast as possible. We have
already explored three data structures, that implement the fundamental
operations (`put` and `get`):

1. **Unordered Array**

   Elements are simply added into a linear data structure (such as an array or
   linked list) without any further order. Insertions are constant ($O(1)$) if
   we allow for duplicate keys, otherwise linear. Retrieving elements is worst
   case linear ($O(N)$) in case of a search miss or late search hit.

2. **Ordered Array**

   If we maintain order of keys in the linear data structure (typically an
   array), we can binary search over the elements in the array to retrieve
   information in logarithmic time ($O(lg\ N)$). However, inserting new elements
   is worst case linear time, if an element is to be added at an early index
   position, since this leads to moving all succeeding elements having to be
   moved one index to the right ($O(N)$).

3. **Symbol Tables/ Hash Maps/ Dictionaries**

   A hash table takes a different approach and completely destroys order of the
   keys. It uses a so-called hash function, that transforms a key into an array
   index, at which the key should be stored and retrieved from. In an ideal
   world, there would be no index collisions, which would lead to constant time
   for both putting and getting elements from the data structure. With proper
   collision-resolution techniques (see _Week 6_), we were able to achieve a
   amortised constant time for both operation.

Don't hash maps solve the searching problem? How can we possibly get better
running time than amortised constant? The answer is: we can't. But often, we
don't only want to store and retrieve single elements, but would like to perform
more complex queries on our data, such as: What is the maximum key stored? Which
keys are in the range X-Z? For these types of questions, hash maps are not
suited, since the nature of the hash function destroys the order of keys,
leading to a linear search over all keys for any query that is more complex
than, _get me element with key `X`_.

For this reason, we will reuse and advance the ideas of storing keys in order as
in an ordered array (2).

## Search Trees

---

In the ordered array implementation of a ST, we have shown how we could cut the
cost of the search (`get()`) operation by maintaining order in the ST and using
binary search for guaranteed logarithmic running time. How can we also make a
call to `put` faster?

To support efficient insertion, it seems that we need a linked structure. But a
singly linked list (with one node linking to one _next_ node) prohibits the use
of binary search, since we cannot maintain order in such an array. **Binary
Search Trees** are the data structure to use for logarithmic time in both
`get()` and `put()` operation.

The binary search tree is a symbol-table implementation that combines the
flexibility of insertion in a linked list (by just creating a new node and
changing a pointer) with the efficiency of search in an ordered array.
Specifically, using two _links_ per node (instead of one link per node in singly
linked lists) leads to an efficient symbol-table implementation based on binary
search tree data structure, which qualifies as one of the most fundamental
algorithms in computer science.

## Structure of Binary Search Tree

---

A binary search tree (BST), also called an ordered or sorted binary tree, is
binary tree where each node has a Comparable key (and an associated value) and
satisfies the restriction that the key in any node is larger than the keys in
all nodes in that node's left subtree and smaller than the keys in in all nodes
in that node's right subtree.

## Implementation

---

We first define a new `Node` class to define the nodes in BSTs. Each node
contains a key, a value, a left link, a right link, and a node count. The left
link points to a BST for items with smaller keys, while the right link points to
a BST for items with larger keys. The node count is the size of the subtree
rooted at the specific node, ie. 1 for leaves and `size()` for the root of the
BST. This class attribute facilitates the implementation of various ordered
symbol-table operations.

Generally, a BST is still just a data structure to store a set of _key-value_
pairs. It is important to note that - just as with the sequential ST - the same
set of key-value pairs can be represented with different instances of BST (or
singly linked lists in the sequential ST) depending on the order of insertions.
Depending on the order, the running time changes (again just as in sequential
ST).

## Runtime Analysis

---

The running time of searches and insertions on a BST depends heavily on the
shape of the tree, which, in turn, is determined by the order of the insertion
of the keys. Thereby, the same set of key-value pairs can both run in worst- or
best-case running time.

In the **best-case** a BST with _n_ keys inserted as nodes could be perfectly
balanced, meaning that the tree would have maximal height of $ln(n)$. Since each
operation of our ST API depends on the height of the tree as a maximal distance
to travel, the worst-case running time. in this case would be precisely $ln(n)$
for both searches and insertions, as we aimed for.

However, there are edge-cases for the **worst-case** when the keys are ie.
inserted in sorted or reverse sorted order, which constructs a BST similar to a
singly linked list. In that case a search path contains _n_ nodes and the
running time would therefore be $O(n)$ for both searches and insertions.

Average running time analysis, however, tells us that in real life application,
when the keys are inserted at random, the running time is much closer to the
best-case than for the worst-case, which is why the standard BST algorithm is
still commonly used, mostly due to its easy implementation.

Average `put()`: $O(lg\ N)$ Average `get()`: $O(lg\ N)$

Worst `put()`: $O(N)$ Worst `get()`: $O(N)$

## 2-3 Balanced Search Trees (Red-Black Search Trees)

---

With the BST data structure, we have found an implementation of a ST that
provides logarithmic searches and insertions in the average case and keeps an
order of the key, such that additional order-based methods can be implemented
for the data structure (in contrast to ie. Hash Tables).

However, we have also seen, how the data structure can have a worst-case running
time, which is not better than the running time of _SequentialST_ (the most
simple way of storing key-value pairs), which is linear in both operation. This
worst case occurs depending on the shape of the BST at hand to store the set of
key-value pairs. The so called **balanced search trees** aim to give a
logarithmic running time guarantee for both searches and insertions, by ensuring
that the BST is balanced at all times (which means that the maximum height of
the tree is $ln(n)$ and therefore all operation run in logarithmic time in
worst-case.

## Structure of 2-3 Trees

---

To get the flexibility we need to ensure maximal depth of $ln(n)$ in our search
tree through perfect balance, and thereby guaranteed logarithmic running time,
is to allow our tree to hold more than one key.

Specifically, we are generalising our idea of nodes from the BST, such that our
tree can consist of two different types of nodes:

- **2-Nodes:** Consist of _one key (and associated values)_ and _two links_ (to
  a left and right child, where the left is smaller and the right greater)

- **3-Nodes:** Consist of _two keys (and associated values)_ and _three links_
  (to a left, middle and right child, where the left is smaller, the middle in
  between the two keys and the right is greater)

## Implementation

---

### Search

---

The search algorithm for keys in a 2-3 tree directly generalises the idea of a
search (`get()`) in our regular BST consisting entirely of 2-nodes. The only
difference is that if we arrive at a 3-node, we not only check whether the given
key is smaller or greater than the keys in the 3-node, but also if it is in
between these two.

### Insertion

---

The insertion operation is the more interesting part, since this is where we
actually build up the 2-3 tree. We can consider several cases of insertions that
can occur, which determine how we change the tree structure.

1. Search Hit Just like in the regular BST, we search through the tree before
   inserting. If we get a search hit on the way, we just change the value of the
   associated node. The same goes for the 2-3
2. Search Miss If our search is unsuccessful, we can either arrive at a 2- or
   3-node at the bottom of the tree.ree.

   2.1 Arriving at 2-Node If we encounter a 2-Node, we have an easy time,
   because we can simply convert the 2-node into a 3-node with the newly added
   key.

   2.2 Arriving at 3-Node (Parent is 2-Node) If we encounter a 3-node at the
   bottom of the tree, and its parent is a 2-node, we temporarily make a 4-node
   (containing 3 keys and 4 links), and then move the middle key of the
   temporary 4 node up as the second (right) element of the new 3-node
   (converted from the old 2-node parent). We then also split up the 3-node into
   2-nodes, where the left node is the middle child of the new parent and the
   right node is the right child of the new parent.

   2.3 Insert into a 3-node whose parent is a 3-node If the parent of the 3-node
   at the bottom is also a 3-node, we recursively perform the exact same
   procedure until we either reach a 2-node or the root (as a 3-node), in which
   case, we perform the next operation.

   2.4 Insert into a 3-node at the root If we try to insert an element into the
   root, which is already a 3-node, we cannot further move the middle element
   up. This is the only time of the algorithm, where our tree increases in size,
   that is, we create a temporary 4-node and then split it up into 3 2-nodes,
   with the middle node being the new root and parent of the its left and right
   child.

_Note, that splitting up a temporary 4-node in a 2-3 tree may be one of six
possible transformations, as can be studied in the below picture. For this
reason, there are a lot of cases to be handled in an implementation of the 2-3
tree._

## Tries

---

Back to strings: In Week 10, We have seen two non-comparison based sorting
algorithms that use the properties of strings that allowed for linear sorting
algorithms - a dramatic increase in performance compared to the general-purpose,
comparison-based sorting algorithms that are bound to best-case runtime of
$n\ log\ n$. A similar recipe is also available for efficiently develop a symbol
table API, where keys are not general purpose, but strings. Whereas Balanced BST
guarantee worst-case lookup of $log\ n$, the trie data structure is constant in
the length of the search key. This makes this data structure perform
significantly better for huge symbol tables, since the running time is
independent of the number of stored items.

The data structure that we are going to use, is called a trie. In computer
science, a trie, also called digital tree or prefix tree, is a type of search
tree, a tree data structure used to store key-value pairs (symbol table
implementations) for keys being of type String.

### Implementation

---

As said, the implementation of our String ST is based on a search tree, known as
a _trie_. As with any search tree, the _trie_ is a data structure composed of
nodes that contain links that are either _null links_ or point to references to
other nodes. Each node is just pointed to by just one node (except for the root,
which does not contain any links pointing to it), however in tries each node can
point to up to $R$ - the size of the alphabet - following nodes.

_Note, that tries are built from the characters of each of the string keys
without ever storing the strings themselves. In fact, not even the characters,
but their ASCII integer value is stored and retrieves the value._

From the construction of the special data structure of the trie, the
characteristic put and get operations on symbol tables are straight forward to
implement recursively:

### Implementing `get()`

---

Finding an associated value of a key is the process of traversing the trie
guided by the characters in the search tree. We start at the root, the follow
the link assocaited with the first character in the key; from that node we
follow the link associated with the second character in the key; and so on and
so forth. The following scenarios are possible:

(1) Recursive Search arrives at last Digit

If we can traverse the trie until we arrive at the node representing the last
character of the search key, there are two options. If the value at this node is
null, we return a search miss. If not, we return the value at the node.

(2) Recursive Search terminates at `Null`

Before arriving at the node representing the last character of the search key,
we arrive at a null link. In that case, we return a search miss.

### Implementing `put()`

---

The put operation operates similarly to the get operation, in fact, the first
thing we do is doing a search: In a trie this means to use the characters of the
key to guide us down the trie until we reach the last character of the key or a
null link.

(1) Recursive Search arrives at last digit

Again, if we arrive at the last digit of the trie, we simply update the value
field of the current node - independently if the value was null before or note
(_Note that this keeps the invariant that our ST does not allow equal keys_)

(2) Recursive Search terminates at `Null`

If we encounter a null link before reaching the last character of the key, we
need to create a node corresponding to each of the characters in the key not yet
encountered and set the value in the last one to the value to be associated with
the key.

### Runtime Analysis

---

The analysis of ST implemented as _tries_ is somewhat remarkable, as it is
immensely different from the implementations, we have encountered so far. It is
a property of _tries_ that for a set of search keys, there exists a unique trie.
This means, that no matter, in what way we insert the keys into the data
structure, the resulting tree will always be the same.

This also makes the run-time analysis easy. For each insertion and search in a
trie, the number of array accesses (moving down nodes in a trie) is at most 1
plus the length of the search key.

Worst Case Runtime: $\sim w+1=O(w)$

It is important to notice that the runtime is independent of the number of
key-value pairs, which makes it an efficient data structure for huge symbol
tables. However, it is very space inefficient, since for each character is
stored individually and has $R$ further links. The number of links in a trie is
therefore between $nR$ and $nwR$. To use tries effectively therefore depends
critically on either choosing a small alphabet size $R$ or to seek better
implementations, such as the Ternary Search Tries (TST), which combine the
features of regular BST with tries for improved space complexity.

## Exercise Solutions

---

### 3.2.9 Shapes of BST

---

With $n=2$ keys in a BST, the following shapes can occur:

```text
1
 \
  2

  2
 /
1
```

With $n=3$ keys in a BST, the following shapes can occur:

```text
1
 \
  2
   \
    3

  2
 / \
1   3

    3
   /
  2
 /
1

1
 \
  3
 /
2

  3
 /
1
 \
  2
```

With $n=4$ keys in a BST, the following shapes can occur:

```text
Insertion order: 1 2 3 4
 1
  2
   3
    4

Insertion order: 1 2 4 3
 1
  2
   4
  3

Insertion order: 1 3 2 4, 1 3 4 2 (same shape)
 1
  3
 2 4

Insertion order: 1 4 2 3
 1
  4
 2
  3

Insertion order: 1 4 3 2
  1
   4
  3
 2

Insertion order: 2 1 3 4, 2 3 1 4, 2 3 4 1
 2
1 3
   4

Insertion order: 2 1 4 3, 2 4 1 3, 2 4 3 1
  2
1   4
   3

Insertion order: 3 2 1 4, 3 2 4 1, 3 4 2 1
    3
  2   4
 1

Insertion order: 3 1 2 4, 3 1 4 2, 3 4 1 2
    3
  1   4
   2

Insertion order: 4 3 2 1
    4
   3
  2
 1

Insertion order: 4 3 1 2
    4
   3
  1
   2

Insertion order: 4 2 1 3, 4 2 3 1
    4
   2
  1 3

Insertion order: 4 1 2 3
    4
   1
    2
     3

Insertion order: 4 1 3 2
    4
   1
    3
   2
```

### 3.3.2. Trace of 2-3 Trees

---

Inserting the keys `Y L P M X H C R A E S` into an initially empty 2-3 tree
yields the following tree:

```text
       P
     /   \
   CL      X
 / | \    / \
A  EH M  RS  Y
```

3.3.3 Insertion Order in 2-3 Tree

Insertion Order: `A X E M R C H S` leads to:

```text
   ER
AC HM SX
```

### 3.3.11 Trace of Red-Black BST

---

Inserting the keys `Y L P M X H C R A E S` into an initially empty
red-black-tree yields the following tree:

```text
Insert Y        (B)Y

       L        (B)Y
             (R)L

       P        (B)Y
             (R)L
                (R)P

       P        (B)Y
             (R)P
           (R)L

       P      (B)P
           (R)L  (R)Y

       P      (R)P
           (B)L  (B)Y

       P      (B)P
           (B)L  (B)Y

       M        (B)P
           (B)L      (B)Y
             (R)M

       M       (B)P
           (B)M     (B)Y
         (R)L

       X        (B)P
           (B)M      (B)Y
         (R)L      (R)X

       H         (B)P
            (B)M      (B)Y
          (R)L      (R)X
         (R)H

       H           (B)P
            (B)L         (B)Y
          (R)H (R)M    (R)X

       H           (B)P
            (R)L         (B)Y
          (B)H (B)M    (R)X

       C            (B)P
             (R)L         (B)Y
           (B)H (B)M    (R)X
         (R)C

       R            (B)P
             (R)L         (B)Y
           (B)H (B)M    (R)X
         (R)C          (R)R

       R            (B)P
             (R)L         (B)X
           (B)H (B)M    (R)R (R)Y
         (R)C

       R            (B)P
             (R)L         (R)X
           (B)H (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
         (R)C

       R            (R)P
             (B)L         (B)X
           (B)H (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
         (R)C

       R            (B)P
             (B)L         (B)X
           (B)H (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
         (R)C

       A              (B)P
               (B)L         (B)X
             (B)H (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
           (R)C
          (R)A

       A                 (B)P
                  (B)L          (B)X
             (B)C     (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
           (R)A (R)H

       A                 (B)P
                  (B)L          (B)X
             (R)C     (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
           (B)A (B)H

       E                 (B)P
                   (B)L          (B)X
              (R)C     (B)M    (B)R (B)Y
           (B)A  (B)H
                (R)E

       S                 (B)P
                   (B)L             (B)X
              (R)C     (B)M    (B)R     (B)Y
           (B)A  (B)H             (R)S
                (R)E

       S                 (B)P
                   (B)L             (B)X
              (R)C     (B)M     (B)S    (B)Y
           (B)A  (B)H         (R)R
                (R)E
```

### 3.2.11 Binary Tree Shapes

---

The question is asking for the number of binary search tree structures that
result in a worst case linear running time for queries to `put()` and `get()`.
Since at each level of depth (except the last one), we can add a left or right
child to continue a linear structure, there are $2^{N - 1}$ binary tree shapes
of $N$ nodes with height $N-1$.

### 3.2.15 Compare-Based Methods

---

a) `floor("Q")` : E - Q b) `select(5)` : E - Q (and D and J for checking size of
left subtree) c) `ceiling("Q")` : E - Q d) `rank("J") : E - Q - J e) `size("D",
"T") : E - Q - T - E - D f) 'keys("D", "T") : E - D - Q - J - M - T - S

### 3.2.20 Running Time of `keys(lo, hi)`

---

The range-based operation `keys(lo, hi)` is supposed to return all keys inside
the interval specified in lo, hi. The operation runs in time proportional to the
height of the tree plus the number of elements that are within the range.

Proof: The two-argument keys() method in a BST works in the following way:

1. It searches the tree until it finds the element which is equal or higher than
   the lower bound.
2. It adds the element to the queue and also adds all its right children that
   are inside the search range.
3. It adds all the other elements which are inside the search range by doing an
   in-order search in the tree (but cutting branches once it finds elements
   outside the range).

Step 1, searching for the element which is equal or higher than the lower bound
is a regular search in a BST which is equal, in the worst case, to the tree
height. Steps 2 and 3 combined take R operations, where R is the number of
elements in the range searched. There may be a constant number of other
compares, which are the cases where the method finds an element outside the
range and stops the search on the current branch of the tree. Combining all the
steps the two-argument keys() in a BST is at most proportional to the tree
height plus the number of keys in the range.

### 3.2.22 Successors and Predecessors of Nodes

---

Proof by contradiction: If the successor has a left child, this element is both
greater than the original node and smaller than the claimed successor. This
would make this left child or one of its descendants the actual successor, and
we have a contradiction.

If the predecessor has a right child, this element is both smaller than the
original node and greater than the predecessor. This would make this right child
or one of its descendants the actual predecessor, and we have a contradiction.

Consider i.e. the following binary search tree and look at key `10`, with
successor `12` and predecessor `9`:

```text
   10
5     15
 9   13
    12 14
```

### 3.3.13 Height of Red-Black-ST

---

True.

### 3.3.22 Comparing BST and R-B-ST

---

An example sequence is: `5 1 10 15 6 0`:

```text
BST

Insert  5     5

        1     5
            1

       10     5
            1   10

       15     5
            1   10
                 15

        6     5
            1    10
                6  15

        0     5
            1    10
           0    6  15

Height: 2
```

```text
Red-black BST

Insert  5       (B)5

        1        (B)5
               (R)1

       10         (B)5
               (R)1  (R)10

       10         (R)5
               (B)1  (B)10

       10         (B)5
               (B)1  (B)10

       15         (B)5
              (B)1  (B)10
                      (R)15

       15         (B)5
              (B)1    (B)15
                    (R)10

       6           (B)5
              (B)1      (B)15
                      (R)10
                    (R)6

       6            (B)5
              (B)1      (B)10
                      (R)6  (R)15

       6            (B)5
              (B)1      (R)10
                      (B)6  (B)15

       6           (B)10
               (R)5      (B)15
           (B)1   (B)6

       0           (B)10
               (R)5      (B)15
           (B)1   (B)6
         (R)0

Height: 3
```

### Red 1: Counting Keys

---

We add an int size attribute to the node class. Then we perform the same "drill
down" operation as in the first proposed solution for exercise 3.2.20. When we
"cut off" the left subtree, we subtract the size of the left subtree from (for
simplicity) a global count that is instantiated as the size of the root. When we
reach the bottom, we do NOT explore the subtrees to the right. At this point,
the count is the amount of keys between [a; ∞]. At the root, we perform the same
"drill down" operation, but defining a right boundary instead. Then we have the
nodes between [a; b]

- in time proportional just to the height of the tree.

### Red 2: Counting Odd Keys

---

The solution is the same as counting keys, but we modify the size attribute to
describe the amount of odd keys in the subtree.
