---
title: Shortest Paths
description:
course: Algorithms & Data Structures
tags: []
published: 2022-03-21
lastEdited: 2022-02-05
---

The algorithmic problem statement of shortest paths is very familiar to a
fundamental problem we have already encountered and solved through BFS, namely
finding paths and shortest paths within a graph with uniform edge-weights (note,
that such a graph is unweighted). In this section, we will deal with a new type
of graph, the edge-weighted graphs. In the context of this problem statement, we
will also consider directed graphs (although the described algorithms also work
for undirected graphs).

## Algorithmic Problem Description

---

For an edge-weighted graph and some given source $s$ compute the single-source
shortest path from $s$ to every reachable vertex $t$ within the entire graph.
The shortest path from vertex $s$ to vertex $t$ in an edge-weighted graph is a
directed path from $s$ to $t$ such that no other path exists that has lower
weight. The total weight of a path is the sum of all of the weights of the edges
on the path.

The output of the algorithm should be a _shortest-path tree_ (_SPT_) for some
source $s$ that can be queried for the shortest path from $s$ to $t$ through its
parent-edge data structure. The SPT is a subgraph of the graph containing $s$
and all the vertices reachable from $s$ such that every tree path is a shortest
path. _Note, that such a tree always exists, since for each reachable vertex
minimality is defined (most extreme: only one path = still minimal), although
there might be more than one SPT, when a vertex $t$ can be reached by $s$ with
the same minimal length for more than one shortest path._

## API

---

For the shortest paths problem in the edge-weighted scenario, we are using a
similar design paradigm as we did for our initial path finding algorithms using
DFS and BFS. The constructor builds a shortest-path tree (SPT) and computes the
shortest paths distances for a given edge-weighted graph and a source vertex
$s$. The data structure can then be queried both for the distance between the
source $s$ and some $t$ (`distTo(t)`) within the graph and the corresponding
shortest path (`pathTo(t)`).

## Dijkstra's Algorithm

---

Dijkstra's algorithm is a famous algorithm for solving the above described
single-source shortest path problem in edge-weighted graphs. It was conceived by
the computer scientist Edsger W. Dijkstra in 1956.

### Core Concept: Relaxation

---

Shortest-paths implementations are usually based on a simple operation known as
_relaxation_. Relaxation is the process of traversing through the entire graph
and whenever encountering a vertex that has never been visited our has been
visited, but from a longer path, _relax_ it. Relaxing in that sense means to
update the previously longer (or non-existing) path to the shorter path and
update the new shortest distance from the source $s$. The term _relaxation_
comes from the analogy, that a rubber band stretched tight on a path connecting
two vertices is being relaxed by the tension, if we find a shorter path.

The below code implements this rather abstract behaviour by maintaining two
major data structures: `edge_to` array, which maintains the parent-link
representation of the shortest-path tree and the `dist_to` array, which
maintains the current minimal distance to some $t$ from $s$. The edge-to array
is initialised to `None` for all entries, while the dist-to array is initialised
to infinity for each ode (_Note that this is important, since otherwise
non-visited vertices would not be relaxed_)

```python
def relax(edge):
  v, w = edge.from_vertex(), edge.to_vertex()
  # relaxation condition
  if dist_to[w] > dist_to[v] + edge.weight():
    dist_to[w] = dist_to[v] + edge.weight() # update distance
    edge_to[w] = edge # update parent-link representation
```

### Procedure

---

The procedure of _Dijkstra's algorithm_ follows immediately from the relaxation
property that we have explored.

1. Initialise an array `edgeTo` (parent-link structure) all to None, except for
   the element at the index of the source node, which is set to itself and an
   array `distTo` all set to infinity, except for the source node, which is set
   to 0.
2. Initialise a Minimum Index Priority Queue in the number of vertices in the
   graph and enqueue the source node together with its distance to itself which
   is zero.
3. Continue in a loop until the priority queue is empty: Dequeue the vertex with
   the minimum current minimum distance and iterate over its adjacent nodes.
   Relax all the edges (meaning to update the edgeTo and distTo of the neighbors
   of the current node, if it is beneficial) and append all nodes with a
   successful relaxation onto the priority queue.

### Runtime Analysis

---

_Dijkstra's algorithm_ guarantees to run in time $O(E\ log\ V)$ (in the worst
case) to solve the single-source shortest paths problem in an edge-weighted
graph digraph with $E$ edges and $V$ vertices. The running time is identical to
the running time of Prim's algorithm, as the algorithm advances through the
graph edge-by-edge from the source $s$.

_Note, that the algorithm generally extends towards computing shortest path in
undirected, edge-weighted graphs. In that case, we would just treat the
undirected graph as a directed one, by adding each edge twice to the digraph,
one time in each direction._

_Also note that Dijskstra's fails to compute the SPT for graphs with negative
edge-weights._

## Bellmann-Ford

---

The Bellman–Ford algorithm is an alternative, less widely used algorithm to
compute shortest paths from a single source vertex to all of the other vertices
in a weighted digraph. It runs slower than Dijkstra's algorithm, but is however
more general, i.e. constructed in a way that it works with any kind of weighted
directed graph.

While Dijkstra's algorithm is built on the idea that advancing from the source
only every constructs longer paths (i.e. with every added edge the path gets
longer), this assumption of non-negative edge weights might not always hold. In
fact _negative_ edge weights lead to Dijkstra's algorithm failing in computing
shortest path.

More drastically, for graphs containing negative cycles (meaning a cycle of
edges, whose sum is negative), the problem of shortest paths is ill-defined,
since walking on this negative cycle infinitely long creates infinitely small
paths.

The Bellman-Ford algorithm, however is able to handle all these cases. It
assigns a shortest-path weight of $\infty$ to all unreachable vertices from the
source $s$, a shortest-path weight of $-\infty$ to all vertices that are on a
path from the source that has a vertex that is on a negative cycle and finally
computes the shortest-path weight (and tree) for all other vertices.

### Procedure

---

The most basic Bellmann-Ford algorithm is really simple, as the algorithm does
not have an order, in which the edges are being relaxed. It simply relaxes all
edges $V$ times. Leading to a runtime of $O(VE)$.

However, a simple modification to this general idea is more efficient in typical
applications and known as the **Queue-Based Bellmann-Ford**.

Specifically, we can easily determine a priori that numerous edges are not going
to lead to a successful relaxation in any given pass: the only edges that could
lead to a change in distTo[] are those leaving a vertex whose distTo[] value
changed in the previous pass. To keep track of such vertices, we use a FIFO
queue and traverse through the graph in a BFS-like fashion (but visiting a
vertex twice, so not keeping track of what vertices were seen and which not) by
dequeuing the least recently visited node and relax all edges to its neighbors.
If the neighbor is not yet on the queue, then we not only relax the edge
connecting it, but also enqueue the node.

## Exercise Solutions

---

### 4.4.1 Adding Constants to Edge Weights

---

Adding a constant to every edge changes the solution to the SPT, since shortest
paths containing more edges are penalised more than paths containing less edges.
An illustrative example might be this simple directed graph, where would like to
find the shortest path from $S$ to $V$. In this original example the shortest
path is of length four and goes through the three vertices $X$. Howevery, adding
any integer constant $\ge 1$ results in the shortest path changing to the
directed between $S$ and $V$.

```text
       5
  S ------> V
1 ↓         ↑  1
  X -> X -> X
    1     1
```

### 4.4.4 Dijkstra's Example

---

In class.

### 4.4.9 SPT Table

---

The error is in the length of the shortest path between Norwich and Westerly. It
cannot be 101 because there is a shorter path (Norwich -> New London ->
Westerly) of length 30. Thus, the corrected version of the table looks the
following:

```text
            Providence  Westerly  New London  Norwich
Providence       -         53         54        48
Westerly         53         -         18        30
New London       54        18          -        12
Norwich          48        30         12         -
```

Thus, we get the following SP between all pairs of cities. The paths also work
reversely, since the graph seems to be undirected given the symmetric nature of
the original table.

Providence-Westerly: Providence->Westerley Providence-New London:
Providence->New London Providence-Norwich: Providence->Norwich

Westerley-New London: Westerley->New London Westerley-Norwich: Westerley->New
London->Norwich

New London-Norwich: New London->Norwich

### 4.4.15 Negative Cycles in Bellman-Ford

---

Bellmann-Ford is designed in a way to take more time than Dijkstra's algorithm,
but is therefore able to handle types of directed graphs as input to compute
shortest paths on. If any of the vertices on the shortest path between the
source node $s$ and the destination $v$, then the returned distance is going to
be $-\infty$ and the shortest path sequence is ill-defined.

### 4.4.31 SPs in a Line Graph

---

A line graph (undirected and weighted in this case) is a special graph composed
of $V$ vertices and $V-1$ edges, with each vertex except the starting and
destination vertex (which have one incident edge) having two incident edges.

Constructing the SP distances and SPT from this type of graph is trivial. We
first process the graph in linear time in order to derive a sorted array of the
vertices in the line graph alongside an array storing the edge weights, also in
order. In order to query the shortest path distance, we simply derive the index
position of the two vertices from the first array and then sum over the edge
weights that connect the two vertices from the given two index positions in the
line graph.

The processing time of this algorithm runs in linear time, but can then be
queried in constant time.

### Exam Question 4: Looped Tree

---

A. The sum of edge weights is indeed 27 if we follow the path from the leftmost
leaf to the rightmost leaf (4+8+1+14).

B. Dijkstra's Algorithm runs in time $O(E\ log\ V)$. In a regular (complete)
binary tree there are at most $V-1$ edges, the runtime is $O(V\ log\ V)$ - or if
we denote the number of nodes as $N$ $O(N\ log\ N)$.

C. Because of the special structure of the weighted graph being a looped tree,
we can devise a faster algorithm to solve the shortest path problem. We can do
it in linear time in the number of nodes. To achieve this, we first need to
identify the root the tree, which we can do by traversing the graph in worst
case linear time (i.e. using BFS). We know we have found the root if the
in-degree of the current vertex is greater than 1. We then reverse all edges in
the graph - again in linear time - to traverse upwards starting at $v$. We
either hit the node $u$, at which point we would stop and return this as the
shortest path (which happens if $v$ is in the subtree of $u$). If this is not
the case, then we hit the root. In this scenario, the final step is to traverse
the unreversed graph from $u$ to the root, since the sum of these edge weights
of the two paths from $u$ to the root and from the root to $v$ is going to be
the shortest path. We do this with a recursive function that examines each path
from $u$ to the root. This leads to a recursive call on every node in the
subtree of $u$. Since the number of such nodes is less than the total number of
nodes, this step also runs in linear time. In total, the worst case running time
is therefore $\sim 3V$, which is still $O(V)$, and therefore a linear time
solution, that is faster than Dijkstra's.
